## Renewing the Articulations between Academic Research, Film Schools and the History of Techniques: from Technès to Beauviatech

On December 28, 1895, a handful of spectators attended the first commercial public screening of the cinematograph in the basement of the Grand Café, boulevard des Italiens in Paris. The first patent for the device was filed by the Lumière brothers on February 13, 1895, the year the conditions were met to design a machine whose qualities derived from a compilation of the characteristics of Thomas Edison’s kinetoscope, Etienne-Jules Marey’s chronophotograph and the technical innovations specific to the cinematograph. Beyond the practical aspect of this dating, the question of the invention of cinema has not failed to raise numerous controversies involving the history of techniques and cultural history. Innovations will continue to play a significant role in the structuring of the history of cinema: the advent of “sound,” the introduction of color processes, the competition from television, the portability of imaging and sound recording devices, the generalization of Dolby sound systems or even the mastery of “3D.” The study of these different stages requires skills which remained for long the exclusive domain of technicians and engineers who were not very inclined to go beyond their fields of expertise. Technical history has therefore been relatively marginalized, and its articulation with other fields of film history (institutional history, history of forms) and with aesthetic analysis, which have become the two dominant fields in research, has remained limited to a few modest attempts. The rapid adaptation of cinema to digital means, which heralds what some call the “digital revolution,” will, however, require considering techniques in much more concrete terms in order to understand all the ongoing changes. The fields of production, distribution and conservation of movies are undergoing profound upheavals, linked to a complete transformation of media and machines due to the evolution from chemical inscription on silver-based media to digital encoding. This configuration seems a priori largely unprecedented, simultaneously affecting industrial, amateur or experimental practices, with significant consequences on all discourses, including film and media studies. This development imposes technological issues as a major subject in a large number of fields: economics, film restoration, aesthetics, ontology, epistemology, etc.

The Technès program (Audiovisual Technologies and Their Uses: History, Epistemology, Aesthetics, 2015/2022) falls within this context with the ambition to place the technical dimension at the center of academic thinking on cinema. In 2013, an International Research Partnership was established with three universities (Lausanne, Montreal, Rennes 2), four film schools (ECAL in Lausanne, INIS in Montreal, École Nationale Supérieure Louis Lumière and Fémis in Paris) and three national cinematheques (Swiss, Quebec and French). The purpose of this cooperation, unprecedented at this level, between research, vocational training and the conservation and distribution of films is to develop synergies between all the fields that are concerned by digital conversion. More than a hundred researchers and PhD students willing to expand their horizons to technological issues while creating a space for dialogue with cinema technicians are now included in Technès.

The first scientific events organized as part of the partnership allowed to put the “revolutionary” dimension of the advent of the digital cinema into perspective. Analysis of previous technical upheavals already identified by history and theory has, indeed, revealed recurrences, echoes, similar technical configurations that contribute to putting contemporary transformations into perspective. Several studies point out, for example, the analogies between the digital transition and the advent of television in the fifties which will be followed, twenty years later, by the democratization of analog video. Other historiographical research testifies to the relevance of the problems that have appeared during two centuries of development of sciences and technology to understand what is at play today with the generalization of digital. The researchers involved in Technès thus contribute to understanding the contemporary world in light of a history of technologies, the first manifestations of which precede the invention of the cinematograph by several decades. This collective will to place digital technology in long- term history implies new approaches requiring innovative collaborations between academics from several fields (visual studies, economics, socio- history, anthropology), engineers, practitioners and institutions such as the Conservatory of Techniques of the Cinémathèque française. The technological history of cinema, which is based on filmed works, on textual sources and on non-textual sources (material, achievements, etc.), must thus jointly organize the history of mechanisms, the history of devices, the history of machines and the history of practices. At each of these levels, aesthetic, epistemological, historical and methodological questions appear.

The digital transition affects all stages of the making of a film, from its preparation to its release to the public. If movie theaters have managed to retain their status as the privileged movie screening setting, the proliferation of viewing devices (mobile phones, computers, “home cinemas” etc.) has led to a notable change in consumption patterns (and therefore perception) of images and sounds. Digital technologies have also had important consequences on the making of films, the most visible part concerning the proliferation of increasingly sophisticated special effects. The nine episodes of the Star Wars saga, produced between 1977 and 2019, are a true laboratory for the study of the way in which technologies are a source of formal inventions due to continuous collaborations between artists and engineers. Digital possibilities determine just as much, by other mechanisms, the advent of long televised series over several seasons, the birth of new forms the documentaries, with increasingly lightweight and powerful cameras and sound recorders, or the existence of very technically sophisticated not very spectacular films of fiction: Entre les Murs (Laurent Cantet, 2008), filmed for the most part in a Parisian college classroom, would not exist in this form without the possibility of continuously filming young amateur actors over very long periods of time with multiple cameras and digital recorders.

Understanding these articulations between the technical and the aesthetics requires taking into account the implications of digital means on the evolution of film professions. In the span of a few years, sometimes in the span of a few months, directors, actors, decorators, scriptwriters, sound engineers, camera operators, editors, mixers, music composers, have been forced to adapt to new machines that have deeply transformed all practices. Understanding and documenting what these professions become is at the heart of the Technès project, but this mission is once again inseparable from the creation of a memory of the gestures associated with working with the film roll, gestures which have conditioned the first century of the existence of cinema. In order to understand the specificities of the relationship between men and machines, a team from Rennes submitted to the ANR (National Research Agency) a research program integrated to Technès and devoted to the archives of the French company Aaton, created and managed from 1971 to 2013 by engineer and inventor Jean-Pierre Beauviala (1937-2019). This program named Beauviatech (Jean- Pierre Beauviala and the Aaton Company: Audio-Visual Techniques and Their Uses; Historical, Aesthetic and Practical Modalities) procured important financing for the 2019/2022 period. Aaton was both at the origin of technical innovations linked to silver-based film and analog video, and a major player in the transition to digital practices. The exploration of this archive collection deposited at the French Cinémathèque allows for the study, based on specific examples, of the technical choices which drive the invention and the evolution of devices, thought up by the engineers of Aaton in close collaboration with users, camera operators and sound recorders. To carry out this program, the researchers of the Department of the Performing Arts of Rennes 2 partnered with members of l’IRSA (Institute of Research in Computing and Random Systems), Mixed Research Unit based in Rennes 1, in the Fémis and at the École nationale supérieure Louis-Lumière, the prominent training schools for audio-visual and film professionals in France.

If a significant part of the work done within the framework of the Technès partnership is intended for the academic community, the societal implications of the history of techniques, well beyond the digital transition itself, make it desirable for the results of the research to be much more widely available. Technès’ ultimate project is therefore to create an Encyclopaedia of Film Techniques, online and constantly updated, which will be inaugurated in June 2021 at the Il Cinema Ritrovato festival in Bologna, Italy. This digital platform, whose funding is provided by the Council of Research in Social Sciences of Canada (CRSH), is an interactive and innovative space, likely to interest academics, professionals and the general public. It will act for the preservation of memory by archiving, particularly in the form of fixed or moving images, of filmed interviews, of 3D digitalization and device demonstrations, an unheralded part of the world’s cinema heritage. While offering a global understanding of the challenges of the digital transition, the Encyclopaedia will open the way to new practices in historical visualization, in heritage promotion and in distributing educational content.

Aaton was both at the origin of technical innovations linked to silver-based film and analog video, and a major player in the transition to digital practices.

### Gilles Mouëllic

Gilles Mouëllic is professor of film studies at the University of Rennes 2. His current work focuses on the relationship between technique and aesthetics as well as on improvisation as a mode of creation in cinema. His latest publications are Godard/Machines (Yellow Now, 2020), co-edited with Antoine de Baecque; Techniques et machines de cinéma : objets, gestes, discours (Ecrans/Classiques Garnier magazine, 2020), co-edited with Laurent Le Forestier and Benoît Turquety; Johan van der Keuken: documenter une présence au monde (Yellow Now, 2020), co-edited with Antony Fiant and Caroline Zéau.
