## Foreword

From the outset, we knew that this Cahier Louis- Lumière dedicated to the Aaton years would be special. We had no concerns over the seriousness of the endeavor: Gilles Mouëllic and Giusy Pisano have a solid reputation for their work on the history of cinematographic techniques, and we had no doubts that they would mobilize a large cohort of specialists entirely devoted to the Aatonian cause.

Well established, the wonderful Beauviatech research program continues, come virus or high water, at the University of Rennes 2. And although the traditional “on-site” conferences and symposiums have obviously been postponed, this review in itself constitutes an authoritative publication, appearing as a main course on the menu of this program financed by the ANR which extends over several years and investigates the relationships between technology and aesthetics, starting with the archives of the Aaton Company. Other landmark publications include Gilles Mouëllic and Antoine de Baecque’s Godard/Machines, published by Yellow Now in 2020, but this fourteenth issue of the Cahier Louis-Lumière will nevertheless long remain one of the highlights in the history of our young magazine.

It all began in 2018, in the crackling of a small force field which brought together the team gathered around Gilles Mouëllic in Rennes (Jean-Baptiste Massuet, Marc Christie, Laurence Bouvet-Lévêque and the doctoral students Elisa Carfantan and Alexia de Mari), the friends and trustees of the Cinémathèque française and its Conservatoire des techniques (Joël Daire and Laurent Mannoni), the wider circle of the Technès international partnership and other amateurs of the epistemology of techniques (Hélène Fleckinger, Benoît Turquety, Vincent Sorrel, André Gaudreault, Laurent le Forestier, Kira Kitsopanidou, Simon Daniellou, Éric Thouvenel, Priska Morrissey, some are missing) and a few fine swordsmen from the ENS Louis-Lumière federated by Giusy Pisano: Martin Roux, Pascal Lagriffoul, Pascal Martin, Alain Sarlat... Everyone gathered around Caroline Champetier and Jean-Pierre Beauviala, for a trip back in time in the form of a farewell ceremony, until the day of departure (8 April 2019).

For all of us, Jean-Pierre ... those were the blooming years: we know the city of Grenoble by heart, the place he invented Aaton in 1971, the way he made a point in plowing his furrow as an idealist, with a love and an obsession for the right idea and the calculated risk... We must thank his parents, who in the middle of the fifties, out of bourgeois conformism and informed provincialism, forbade him the noble pathway of the Parisian Beaux Arts of the rue Bonaparte to send him among engineers in Grenoble. It’s hard to imagine what Jean-Pierre Beauviala’s career would have been like if he had been an artist in Paris at the age of 25 rather than an electronics teacher in Isère. Incidentally, when Éclair lays him off, circumstances allow him to quickly return to the Rhone mists where he establishes himself permanently and where he now rests, between the Dévoluy and the Vercors, the Écrins and the Belledonne mountains.

There was an art gallery in Lyon in the 1970s on the quays of the Saône called L’œil écoute [the eye listens]. Albeit simple, this synesthesia magnificently summarizes Beauviala’s approach throughout the so-called “Aaton years.” For out of the crucible of this scruffy alchemist emerged machines regarded not as cumbersome, but as a natural extension of the technician’s body. True phenomenological prostheses, the LTR and XTR series, the Paluche, the A-Minima, the Penelope and all the associated experiments, from the sublime Cantar to the dreamed Libellule of the last weeks, redefined the relationship between technicians and the recording of reality, offering several generations of filmmakers, from Jean Rouch to Leos Carax, the devices they needed to dream their images and sounds. Caroline Champetier understands better than anyone what these devices, infinitely perfectible and designed to be, have brought to film professionals: she has widely contributed to the iconographic contents of this Cahier and we thank her.

The multiple contributors brought together in this volume tell this story, each in their own way, each with their own methodologies and approaches. They’re returning Jean-Pierre Beauviala a piece of what he gave them. Our École does the same, in this compilation in praise of the provinces and of time regained. Of course, we would have liked him to hold this Cahier in his hands... But if all our students take a hold of it and bring it home, we know that deep down it’s exactly what he would have wanted.

It is in that sense a particular source of pride and emotion to find included here an article by one of our students, Thomas Weyland, entitled Learning the Image: From the Camcorder to the Delta Penelope. It is perhaps the best possible tribute we could give to the memory of Jean-Pierre Beauviala. For, as Diderot’s Rameau’s Nephew, he could have said: “I learned by teaching others, and I turned out some good pupils...”

### VINCENT LOWY

Vincent Lowy is a university professor and director of the École nationale supérieure (ENS) Louis-Lumière. His research activities are part of the ISOR Axis of the Centre d’histoire du XIXe siècle (Paris 1 - Sorbonne University - EA 3550) and focus on the relationships between history and cinema and social and memorial representations. He has directed several collections of books on the history and aesthetics of cinema at Le Bord de l’eau Éditions, where he has notably published Marcel Ophuls (2008), Cinéma et mondialisation (2011) and more recently with Arnaud Duprat La Maman et la putain, politique de l’intime (2020).