## Introduction: In Praise of Hybridity

> Utensils that are a priori entirely reducible to their functionality can become objects as unique as the people who own them and make them work. The completely standard character of the object is gradually altered by adaptation and marking procedures. With our camera or our boat, we all build affinities and intimate connections that transform the tool, way beyond the extension of the hand or an instrument of reason, into an alter ego. Between the churinga and the coffee grinder, two experiences of ‘the thing’ can be grasped, one in the realm of the strange, the other in the realm of the familiar. Whereas in religious rites the irruption of the thing, skillfully generated and staged, turns it practically into a person (a subject), the daily use of common objects and their capacity to answer us (‘the feedback of reality’) gives them a life that is inseparable from the one of their owners. It is therefore necessary, with Mauss, to seriously consider the singularity and ‘the soul’ of things and understand that a gift is never an exchange. Visible token of a personal and collective history, it opens an infinite debt, and beyond, a circuit of singular objects, a transfer of personalized things[^1].

[^1]: BAZIN J., Bensa Alban, «Les objets et les choses: Des objets à la “chose”». In: Genèses, 17, 1994, p. 6.

On October 13 and 14, 2011, the Cinémathèque française organized a symposium named Digital Revolution: What if Cinema Lost Its Memory? Among the participants: Jean-Pierre Beauviala, the president of the Aaton Company, until 2013. He proposes the large audience in the Henri Langlois hall a dialogue around the question Towards a hybrid cinema? The idea of a possible hybridity that could allow for the preservation of the best of silver-based film in the digital realm, “to temper the loss, to limit the differences between film and digital,[^2]” was never abandoned by the inventor. Jean-Pierre Beauviala added touches of this hybridity, sometimes with little scientific evidence: in the same symposium, when he stated that “the autochrome is exactly the principle which is used in the best performing digital cameras[^3]” and launched the project of a digital sound recording device with two optical stereo tracks, visible to the naked eye; in his conversations with the students of the ENS Louis- Lumière he stressed the importance of continuing to teach silver-based film (March 13, 2018); when he imagined tools that resulted from the observation of gestures and lastly, in his last patent for the Delta Penelope camera.

[^2]: GRIZET D., Les appareils de prise de vues de la société Aaton (1971-2013). Du «direct» au «numérique»: enjeux techniques et esthétiques, Master's thesis, Recherche en Études cinématographiques, under the supervision of MOUËLLIC G., Université Rennes 2, 2017, p. 87.

[^3]: [Vers un cinéma hybride? Dialogue avec Jean-Pierre Beauviala](https://www.canalu.tv/video/cinematheque_francaise/vers_un_cinema_hybride_dialogue_avec_jean_pierre_beauviala.7767).

### Aaton: Imagining Tools through Gestures

Director Éliane de Latour has experimented with
the interconnections of tools and gestures in all her
films:

> As we were rock, reggae, or rap, we were ‘aatonien,’ and in good company. Albert and David Maysles, Ricky Leackok, Michel Brault, Jean-Luc Godard, Louis Malle, Pierre Perrault, Jean Rouch, and on the activist side: Renaud Victor, Richard Coppans... For twenty-five years, all my films were shot with Aaton cameras. My path followed their evolutions: LTR 16 mm, XTR Super 16 mm, 35 mm with accessories invented over the days by Jean-Pierre Beauviala. Integrated time code, comb shutter (never sold), white magazines against the sun (never sold), black frame in the viewfinder (never sold). I liked to frame. It’s something that can’t be learned but that you feel inside, with impressions of failure, relevance or euphoria in moments of fusion with a gesture or a light: two notes which suddenly vibrate together[^4].

[^4]: DE LATOUR E., “La fausse bataille de l’art et de la science. Mise en scène cinématographique en ethnologie” Revue française des méthodes visuelles, 2 | 2018, posted on July 12, 2018, consulted on 08/11/2020, [Enlace](https://rfmv.fr).

These impressions of relevance, of euphoria, of failure, of fusion with a gesture or a light are evoked by the professionals who have had the opportunity to use the Delta Penelope camera: an unusual digital camera, tactile rather than digital. As Martin Roux emphasizes, with its shutter fitted with a classic rotating mirror, its flexible device randomly shifting the physical position of the sensor by half a pixel for each image, it gives the impression of regaining the aesthetic quality of the film roll. Its optical viewfinder, on which Pascal Martin focused his attention, “offers a particular feeling that is almost timeless, because nothing tells the person using it whether the recording is done on a sensor or on an emulsion behind the lens.” And he adds: “Doesn’t the flicker caused by the shutter (mainly on highlights) create, even unconsciously, a resonance with film projection?[^5]”

[^5]: MARTIN P., “Optical Viewfinding”, p. 145-149.

Beyond the qualities or defects attributed to this camera that remained a prototype, for Thomas Weyland, it “allows apprentice operators to learn the ropes ... forces to think the limits, to confront them and to find solutions that allow to exceed them, and possibly come back to them later to go even further.[^6]” The reason that explains why the École nationale supérieure Louis-Lumière devoted an educational workshop to the Delta Penelope, and why in this issue of the Cahier ENS Louis-Lumière it is a subject of focus to teachers, students and ex-students lies in the perspective of the ontological project which presided over its invention: to locate the aesthetic stake in the confluence of the gesture and the tool because “its entire conception is an invitation to the manual apprehension of the operator, be it the rotary selector, the optical viewfinder, or the shape of the camera made to fit to the shoulder.[^7]” In contrast, therefore, to the increasingly disembodied perception of the digital tool. Hence the challenge of the educational workshop “Filming with the Delta Penelope” that allowed students to reflect on the concept of a prototype, of the non-standardized, thus leaving open the possible responses to technical constraints.

[^6]: WEYLAND T., “ Learning the Image: From the Camcorder to the Delta Penelope”, p. 153-165.

[^7]: ROUX M., “The Penelope Delta, the Last Tactile Camera”, p. 139-144.

Among the devices built by the Aaton Company, the Cantar, the first eight-track digital sound recorder, is also special in its design. The latter results from the praxis, “the gestures involved in handling the recorder, the way in which the device allows movements and influences them are important during the phase of the development of the object but also for its integration in work.[^8]” It is through the observation of working gestures, through discussions with sound engineers that the Cantar had been designed to meet the constraints of the profession: fast, discreet, flexible. As Jean-Pierre Duret testified to in an interview with Camille Pierre: “the essential thing is to maintain lightness, the proximity with the performance, with the set and the scene in the making, which the Cantar allows.[^9]” It is this principle that tools need to be designed from gestures which is at the heart of the collaboration between the ENS Louis-Lumière and the ANR Beauviatech project; such as this publication that brings together academics, archivists, professionals, teachers, students, around the Aaton Company (1971-2013) whose inventions have always been imagined by users (technicians and filmmakers).

[^8]: PIERRE C., «Manier le Cantar: la mise en œuvre d’un geste de travail», p. 166 à 172.

[^9]: ROUX M., “The Penelope Delta, the Last Tactile Camera”, p. 139-144.

### Life in the Factory and in the City

The objects in question here belong to both a personal and collective history: of Jean-Pierre Beauviala—the inventor, artist, industrialist of the Aaton Company, and of the professionals solicited to discover, test, suggest new tools. Certainly, cameras, sound recorders, accessories, are “objects as unique as the people who own them and make them work.[^10]” The premises of the Aaton Company, located in the old quarter of downtown Grenoble, were thought out as a space designed to facilitate exchanges between Aatonians, technicians and also filmmakers. The latter frequently visited and on this occasion the prototypes were improved, the devices were experimented with, their qualities were sometimes called into question. “The Visit to Grenoble: The Aaton Factory Manufactures Images and Sounds” is a call that Vincent Sorrel and Nicolas Tixier made in order to collect testimonies on this mythical place; the first responses are published in this issue. The filmmaker and director of photography Bruno Carrière, the filmmaker and visual artist Valentine Miraglia, the photographer-director Eric Hurtado share their memories in rich details though they sometimes date back to 1979. A few days’ stay in Grenoble to discover the very special premises of the factory, try out Jean- Pierre Beauviala’s new jewels and chat with others who arrived at the same time, in particular: Raymond Depardon, Julie Flament, Jean-Pierre Rouette, René Vautier, William Lubtchansky.

[^10]: BAZIN J., BENSA A., “Les objets et les choses: Des objets à ‘la chose,’” Genèses, 17, 1994, p. 6.

Along with these oral testimonies, there are photographic traces which, no doubt, Jean-Pierre Beauviala favored. He let things happen, even in private; he became a model, he was the actor and the complacent eye of the photographer because he was aware that these images would one day constitute as many traces of the public and personal history of the Aaton Company and of Beauviala himself. He was careful not to separate the factory from the city people, the city people from the factory people:

> Aaton is on the street where—as we were able to show yesterday with Raymond [Depardon]—all the people on the street can see what is happening inside a company, in a factory, in workshops, in a word, people at work. It was one of my concerns (...) A city for me was a place of life. Not only a place of merchants, not just a place of dormancy, but it was also a place of work and unfortunately in cities today there is no more work. The work is gone, the real work: the transformation has disappeared, what we call the secondary sector in economics; the primary being mining, agriculture ..., the secondary being transformation and the tertiary being trade. And in the city there is practically no secondary left. Before there were carpenters, coachbuilders, painters...[^11]

[^11]: MIRAGLIA V., “An Aatonian in Grenoble”, p. 100-109.

The series of photographs presented by Caroline Champetier and Pascal Lagriffoul opens on an emblematic image: the Aaton mechanical workshops seen through the windows of the rue de la Paix. It continues inside, where prototypists, technicians and filmmakers, “up to their elbows in it,” test the balance of a camera, of a viewfinder, or even the quartz devices for time marking. These photographs show another important aspect of Aaton’s activities: the presentation of its devices at trade shows, such as Photokina. The Aaton factory as a model—militant, committed but also attentive to the market—is also defended through advertising and put forward in the various interventions of Jean-Pierre Beauviala in the press and in particular in Les Cahiers du cinéma.[^12]

[^12]: GODEFROY T., “Jean-Pierre Beauviala in the Cahiers du cinéma: The Story of the Inventor”, p. 125-135.

## Draw, Experiment, Redraw to Reinvent and Finally Patent

The constant exchange with the users of the devices is one of the characteristics of the Aaton Company. In their study of the Aaton archives preserved at the French Cinémathèque, Alexia de Mari and Jean-Baptiste Massuet present a hybrid collection of heterogeneous elements “ranging from personal documents—photographs, letters, drawings—to precise and detailed technical files—manufacturing plans, customer files (after-sales service), etc.[^13]” Its analysis gives the opportunity to write a history of techniques in use in which the human and the technological come together, as the reader will be able to see from one text to another.

[^13]: DE MARI A. et MASSUET J.-B., “The Study of the Aaton Collection: A Challenge to Cinema Research and a Sign of the Times”, p. 29-38.

Marianne Bauer and Simon Daniellou have more specifically studied from this archive collection film documents that cover the period 1965-2008, from the advent of direct cinema to the digital transition. There too, hybridity reigns: technical essays, rushes, 16 mm, Super 16 and 35 mm formats, production copies, magnetic tapes, digital sound files, family films, documentaries, fictions. Even more so given that the shooting locations are both private (at Beauviala’s) and professional (at Aaton’s) and the purposes are of different kinds: formats, cameras, sound recorders suited for film professionals and others for television professionals. The tests relate both to new prototypes and to commonly used devices that can be transformed and developed. Thus, the Super 9.5 format is tested with a modified camera Beaulieu 9.5; the Super 16 format is tested by modifying an Éclair 16 camera in order to obtain an image much larger than that of the standard 16 mm (+ 40%), for an image ratio of 1.66:1 more suitable for blow ups in 35 mm, but also subsequently to transfer to 16/9 format (i.e. a ratio of 1.78:1). Tests for the 3-perf format are performed with a transformed Aaton 35 camera. As for time marking, it is the subject of numerous tests intended to test two possibilities. On the one hand, the simultaneous recording of images and sounds (preferred by Jean-Pierre Beauviala) by processes such as the “single system.” On the other hand, the independent recording of images and sounds whose synchronization is ensured by a clear-marking system readable with the naked eye (a principle Jean-Pierre Beauviala was attached to), such as the system integrated in the Aaton 7 LTR camera (option T) or later, in the mid-1980s, the double time marking (Aaton Code) incorporated in the Aaton XTR cameras and “read”, in post-production, thanks to the dual reading heads of the Linker telecine. For Marianne Bauer and Simon Daniellou, with these tests “thus emerges a Beauviala ‘director,’ who knows what matters to a filmmaker, a cameraman and therefore a camera: the depth of field management, the luminosity, the relationship of the imager to the space and the filmed object (impact of the ergonomics on the cameraman’s movements, panoramic versus traveling, 45° viewfinder for low angle and management of the frame tremor) and the respective freedom between the latter and the sound recorder.[^14]”

[^14]: BAUER M. et DANIELLOU S., “The Aaton Film Collection: Technical Tests and Slices of Life”, p. 39-53.



## Giusy Pisano

